



WEBPUSH                                                       M. Thomson
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Standards Track                          March 26, 2015
Expires: September 27, 2015


                 Generic Event Delivery Using HTTP Push
                   draft-thomson-webpush-http2-latest

Abstract

   A simple protocol for the delivery of realtime events to user agents
   is described.  This scheme uses HTTP/2 server push.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 27, 2015.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2015 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Conventions and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  HTTP Resources  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   3.  Registration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Subscribing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   5.  Requesting Push Message Delivery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Receiving Push Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   7.  Operational Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     7.1.  Load Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.2.  Push Message Expiration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     7.3.  Registration and Subscription Expiration  . . . . . . . .  10
     7.4.  Implications for Application Reliability  . . . . . . . .  11
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     8.1.  Confidentiality from Push Service Access  . . . . . . . .  12
     8.2.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     8.3.  Authorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     8.4.  Denial of Service Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     8.5.  Logging Risks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   9.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   10. Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   11. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     11.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     11.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17

1.  Introduction

   Mobile computing devices are increasingly relied upon for a great
   many applications.  Mobile devices typically have limited power
   reserves, so finding more efficient ways to serve application
   requirements is an important part of any mobile platform.

   One significant contributor to power usage mobile devices is the
   radio.  Radio communications consumes a significant portion of the
   energy budget on a wirelessly connected mobile device.

   Many applications require continuous access to network communications
   so that real-time events - such as incoming calls or messages - can
   be conveyed (or "pushed") to the user in a timely fashion.
   Uncoordinated use of persistent connections or sessions from multiple
   applications can contribute to unnecessary use of the device radio,
   since each independent session independently incurs overheads.  In
   particular, keep alive traffic used to ensure that middleboxes do not
   prematurely time out sessions, can result in significant waste.




Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   Maintenance traffic tends to dominate over the long term, since
   events are relatively rare.

   Consolidating all real-time events into a single session ensures more
   efficient use of network and radio resources.  A single service
   consolidates all events, distributing those events to applications as
   they arrive.  This requires just one session, avoiding duplicated
   overhead costs.

   The W3C Web Push API [API] describes an API that enables the use of a
   consolidated push service from web applications.  This expands on
   that work by describing a protocol that can be used to:

   o  request the delivery of a push message to a user agent,

   o  register a new user agent,

   o  create new push message delivery subscriptions, and

   o  monitor for new push messages.

   Requesting the delivery of events is particularly important for the
   Web Push API.  The registration, management and monitoring functions
   are currently fulfilled by proprietary protocols; these are adequate,
   but do not offer any of the advantages that standardization affords.

   The monitoring function described in this document is intended to be
   replaceable, enabling the use of monitoring schemes that are better
   optimized for the network environment and the user agent.  For
   instance, using notification systems like the 3GPP Short Message
   Service (SMS) [TS.3GPP.23.040] can take advantage of the native
   paging capabilities of a cellular network, avoiding the ongoing
   maintainence cost of a persistent TCP connection.

   This document intentionally does not describe how a push service is
   discovered.  Discovery of push services is left for future efforts,
   if it turns out to be necessary at all.  User agents are expected to
   be configured with a URL for a push service.

   Similarly, discovery of support for and negotiation of use of
   alternative monitoring schemes is left to documents that extend this
   basic protocol.

1.1.  Conventions and Terminology

   In cases where normative language needs to be emphasized, this
   document falls back on established shorthands for expressing
   interoperability requirements on implementations: the capitalized



Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD" and "MAY".  The meaning of these
   is described in [RFC2119].

   This document defines the following terms:

   application:  Both the sender and ultimate consumer of push messages.
      Many applications have components that are run on a user agent and
      other components that run on servers.

   application server:  The component of an application that runs on a
      server and requests the delivery of a push message.

   push message:  A message, sent from an application server to a user
      agent via a push service.

   push service:  A service that delivers push messages to user agents.

   registration:  A session that is established between the user agent
      and the push service.  A registation has any number of associated
      subscriptions.

   subscription:  A message delivery context that is established between
      the user agent and the push service and shared with applications.
      All push messages are associated with a subscription.

   user agent:  A device and software that is the recipient of push
      messages.

   Examples in this document use the HTTP/1.1 message format [RFC7230].
   Many of the exchanges can be completed using HTTP/1.1, where HTTP/2
   is necessary, the more verbose frame format from
   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2] is used.

2.  Overview

   A general model for push services includes three basic actors: a user
   agent, a push service, and an application (server).














Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


    +-------+           +--------------+       +-------------+
    |  UA   |           | Push Service |       | Application |
    +-------+           +--------------+       +-------------+
        |                      |                      |
        |      Register        |                      |
        |--------------------->|                      |
        |       Monitor        |                      |
        |<====================>|                      |
        |      Subscribe       |                      |
        |--------------------->|                      |
        |           Provide Subscription              |
        |-------------------------------------------->|
        |                      |                      |
        :                      :                      :
        |                      |     Push Message     |
        |    Push Message      |<---------------------|
        |<---------------------|                      |
        |                      |                      |

   At the very beginning of the process, the user agent creates a
   registration resource at the push service.  The registration is the
   basis of all future interactions between the user agent and push
   service.  The registration aggregates push messages that the user
   agent receives from all subscriptions.

   The registration resource describes how the user agent is expected to
   monitor for incoming push messages.  This document describes one such
   mechanism, though more efficient means of monitoring could be
   defined.

   The registration resource also describes how the user agent might
   create a subscription.  A new subscription is created by the user
   agent and then distributed by to an application server.

   It is expected that a different subscription will be provided to each
   application; however, there are no inherent cardinality constraints
   in the protocol.  Multiple subscriptions might be created for the
   same application, or multiple applications could use the same
   subscription.  Note however that sharing subscriptions can have
   security and privacy implications.

   Application servers use subscriptions to deliver push messages to
   user agents, via the push service.

   Both registrations and subscriptions have a limited lifetime.  They
   can also be terminated by either push service or user agent at any
   time.  User agents and application servers need to be prepared to
   handle changes in registrations and subscriptions; the protocol



Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   described here supports any number of either resource concurrently
   with minimal overhead.

2.1.  HTTP Resources

   This protocol uses HTTP resources [RFC7230] and link relations
   [RFC5988].  The following resources are defined:

   push service:  This resource is used in Registration (Section 3).  It
      is configured into user agents.

   registration:  A link relation of type "urn:ietf:params:push:reg"
      refers to a registration resource.  This resource is used by a
      user agent in requesting the delivery of push messages.  A process
      for monitoring for messages using this resource is described in
      Section 6.

   subscribe:  A link relation of type "urn:ietf:params:push:sub" refers
      to a resource where a user agent can create new subscriptions.
      Creating a subscription is described in Section 4.

   subscription:  A link relation of type "urn:ietf:params:push" refers
      to a subscription resource.  Subscription resources are used to
      deliver push messages.  An application server sends push messages
      (Section 5) and a user agent receives push messages (Section 6)
      using this resource.

3.  Registration

   A user agent that wishes to establish a new or replacement
   registration sends an HTTP POST request to its configured push
   service resource.

   A request to create a registration contains no entity body.  A future
   specification MAY define a format and semantics for the entity body
   on this request.

   The push service creates a new registration and subscribe resource in
   response to this request.  URIs for these resources are included in
   Link header fields in the response.  The push server includes the
   "registration" link relation in a Location header field.

   For example, the following request requests the creation of a new
   registration:

   POST /register HTTP/1.1
   Host: push.example.net




Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   The following response might be generated in response to this
   request:

   HTTP/1.1 201 Created
   Date: Thu, 11 Dec 2014 23:56:47 GMT
   Link: </monitor/1G_GIPMorg_n-IrQvqZr6g>;
           rel="urn:ietf:params:push:reg"
   Link: </subscribe/1G_GIPMorg_n-IrQvqZr6g>;
           rel="urn:ietf:params:push:sub"
   Location: https://push.example.net/monitor/1G_GIPMorg_n-IrQvqZr6g
   Cache-Control: max-age=8640000, private


   The push server SHOULD provide a URI for the associated "subscribe"
   resource and any known expiration information in response to requests
   to the "registration" resource.

4.  Subscribing

   A user agent sends a POST request to the "subscribe" resource to
   create a new subscription.

   POST /subscribe/1G_GIPMorg_n-IrQvqZr6g HTTP/1.1
   Host: push.example.net


   A response with a 201 (Created) status code includes a URI for the
   subscription in the Location header field.

   HTTP/1.1 201 Created
   Date: Thu, 11 Dec 2014 23:56:52 GMT
   Link: </p/LBhhw0OohO-Wl4Oi971UGsB7sdQGUibx>;
           rel="urn:ietf:params:push"
   Location: https://push.example.net/p/LBhhw0OohO-Wl4Oi971UGsB7sdQGUibx
   Cache-Control: max-age:864000, private


5.  Requesting Push Message Delivery

   A push subscription is an HTTP resource [RFC7230].

   An application server requests the delivery of a push message by
   sending an HTTP PUT request to this resource, including the push
   message in the body of the request.







Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   PUT /p/LBhhw0OohO-Wl4Oi971UGsB7sdQGUibx HTTP/1.1
   Host: push.example.net
   Content-Type: text/plain;charset=utf8
   Content-Length: 15

   Hello, World!

   A simple 200 response is sufficient to indicate that the push message
   was accepted.  This does not indicate that the message was delivered
   to the user agent.

   HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   Date: Thu, 11 Dec 2014 23:56:55 GMT
   Cache-Control: max-age=600


   A push service MAY generate a 413 (Payload Too Large) status code in
   response to PUT requests that include an entity body that is too
   large.  Push services MUST NOT generate a 413 status code in
   responses to an entity body that is 4k (4096 bytes) or less in size.

   A push service that does not store messages can stream the payload of
   push messages to the user agent.  Flow control SHOULD be used to
   limit the state commitment for delivery of large messages.

6.  Receiving Push Messages

   A user agent requests the delivery of new push messages by making a
   GET request to the "registration" resource.  The push service does
   not respond to this request, it instead uses HTTP/2 server push
   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2] to send the contents of push messages as
   they are sent by application servers.

   Each push message is pushed in response to a synthesized GET request.
   The GET request is made to the same "subscription" URI that is used
   by the application server to send the message.  The response body is
   the entity body from the most recent PUT request sent to the
   subscription resource.

   The following example request is made over HTTP/2.

   HEADERS      [stream 7] +END_STREAM +END_HEADERS
     :method        = GET
     :path          = /monitor/1G_GIPMorg_n-IrQvqZr6g
     :authority     = push.example.net






Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   The push service permits the request to remain outstanding.  When a
   push message is sent by an application server, a server push is
   associated with the initial request.  The response includes the push
   message.

   PUSH_PROMISE [stream 7; promised stream 4] +END_HEADERS
     :method        = GET
     :path          = /p/LBhhw0OohO-Wl4Oi971UGsB7sdQGUibx
     :authority     = push.example.net

   HEADERS      [stream 4] +END_HEADERS
     :status        = 200
     date           = Thu, 11 Dec 2014 23:56:55 GMT
     last-modified  = Thu, 11 Dec 2014 23:56:55 GMT
     cache-control  = private
     content-type   = text/plain;charset=utf8
     content-length = 15

   DATA         [stream 4] +END_STREAM
     Hello World!\r\n

   A user agent might receive a PUSH_PROMISE for a resource for which
   they have no active subscription.  The resulting unwanted push
   message can be ignored, or the corresponding stream can be reset
   (using RST_STREAM) to avoid expending bandwidth.

   A user agent can request the contents of the "registration" resource
   immediately by including a Prefer header field [RFC7240] with a
   "wait" parameter set to "0".  The push server SHOULD return a link
   reference to the "registration" resource and expiration information
   in response to this request.  This request also triggers the delivery
   of all push messages that the push service has stored but not yet
   delivered.  The server MUST generate a server push for all stored
   messages that have not yet been delivered.

   A user agent can request the last push message for a "subscription"
   resource by sending GET requests to its URI.  A 200 (OK) status
   response contains the last push message sent to the subscription.  A
   204 (No Content) status code indicates that no messages are presently
   available.

7.  Operational Considerations

   A push service is likely to have to maintain a very large number of
   open TCP connections.  Effective management of those connections can
   depend on being able to move connections between server instances.





Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


7.1.  Load Management

   A user agent MUST support the 307 (Temporary Redirect) status code
   [RFC7231], which can be used by a push service to redistribute load
   at the time that a new registration is requested.

   A server that wishes to redistribute load can do so using alternative
   services [I-D.ietf-httpbis-alt-svc].  Alternative services allows for
   redistribution of load whilst maintaining the same URIs for various
   resources.  User agents can ensure a graceful transition by using the
   GOAWAY frame once it has established a replacement connection.

7.2.  Push Message Expiration

   Push services typically store messages for some time to allow for
   limited recovery from transient faults.  If a push message is stored,
   but not delivered, the push service can indicate the probable
   duration of storage by including expiration information in the
   response to the push request.

   A push service is not obligated to store messages indefinitely.  If a
   user agent is not actively monitoring for push messages, those
   messages can be lost or overridden by newer messages on the same
   subscription.

   Push messages that were stored and not delivered to a user agent are
   delivered when the user agent recommences monitoring.  Stored push
   messages SHOULD include a Last-Modified header field (see Section 2.2
   of [RFC7232]) indicating when delivery was requested by an
   application server.

   A GET request to a "subscription" resource that has expired messages
   results in a 204 (No Content) status response, equivalent to if no
   push message were ever sent.

   Push services might need to limit the size and number of stored push
   messages to avoid overloading.  In addition to using the 413 (Payload
   Too Large) status code for too large push messages, a push service
   MAY expire push messages prior to any advertised expiration time.

7.3.  Registration and Subscription Expiration

   In some cases, it may be necessary to terminate registrations or
   subscriptions so that they can be refreshed.

   A push service might choose to set a fixed expiration time.  If a
   resource has a known expiration time, expiration information is




Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   included in responses to requests that create the resource, or in
   requests that retrieve a representation of the resource.

   Expiration is indicated using either the Expires header field, or by
   setting a "max-age" parameter on a Cache-Control header field (see
   [RFC7234]).  The Cache-Control header field MUST also include the
   "private" directive.

   A push service can invalidate a registration or subscription at any
   time.  If a user agent has an outstanding request to the
   "registration" resource (see Section 6), this can be signaled by
   returning a 400-series status code, such as 410 (Gone).  A push
   service uses server push to indicate that a subscription has expired;
   a pushed 400-series status code for the subscription resource signals
   the termination of a subscription.

   A user agent can request that a registration or subscription be
   removed by sending a DELETE request to the corresponding URI.
   Removing a registration causes all associated subscriptions to be
   removed.  Requests to delete a subscription MUST be authenticated;
   the URI for subscriptions will be known by multiple entities, most of
   whom will not be authorized to remove the subscription.

   A push service MUST send a 400-series status code, such as 404 (Not
   Found) or 410 (Gone) if an application server atttempts to send a
   push message to a removed or expired subscription.

7.4.  Implications for Application Reliability

   An application developer might find it tempting to create alternative
   mechanisms for message delivery in case the push service fails to
   deliver a critical message.  Setting up a polling mechanism or a
   backup messaging channel in order to compensate for these
   shortcomings negates almost all of the advantages a push service
   provides.

   Applications are encouraged to instead provide a means to detect
   situations where push messages were not delivered and recover
   gracefully.  For instance, an application server might include a
   sequence number in push messages; a gap in the sequence can then be
   used to trigger some form of state resynchronization.  For instance,
   the missing messages might be requested from the application server
   directly.  Push service failures are expected to be rare, therefore
   performance optimization of any recovery mechanism might be
   unnecessary.






Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


8.  Security Considerations

   This protocol MUST use HTTP over TLS [RFC2818]; this includes any
   communications between user agent and push service, plus
   communications between the application and the push service.  Thus,
   all URIs use the "https" scheme.  This provides confidentiality and
   integrity protection for registrations and push messages from
   external parties.

8.1.  Confidentiality from Push Service Access

   The protection afforded by TLS does not protect content from the push
   service.  Without additional safeguards, a push service is able to
   see and modify the content of the messages.

   Applications are able to provide additional confidentiality,
   integrity or authentication mechanisms within the push message
   itself.  The application server sending the push message and the
   application on the user agent that receives it are frequently just
   different instances of the same application, so no standardized
   protocol is needed to establish a proper security context.  The
   process of providing the application server with subscription
   information provides a convenient medium for key agreement.

   The Web Push API codifies this practice by requiring that each push
   subscription created by the browser be bound to a browser generated
   encryption key.  Pushed messages are authenticated and decrypted by
   the browser before delivery to applications.  This scheme ensures
   that the push service is unable to examine the contents of push
   messages.

   The public key for a subscription ensures that applications using
   that subscription can identify messages from unknown sources and
   discard them.  This depends on the public key only being disclosed to
   entities that are authorized to send messages on the channel.  The
   push server does not require access to this public key.

8.2.  Privacy Considerations

   Push message confidentiality does not ensure that the identity of who
   is communicating and when they are communicating is protected.
   However, the amount of information that is exposed can be limited.

   Subscription URIs MUST NOT provide any basis to correlate
   communications for a given user agent.  It MUST NOT be possible to
   correlate any two subscription URIs based solely on the content of
   the subscription URIs.  This allows a user agent to control
   correlation across different applications, or over time.



Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   In particular, user and device information MUST NOT be exposed
   through the subscription URI.

   In addition, subscription URIs established by the same user agent
   MUST NOT include any information that allows them to be correlated
   with the associated registration or the user agent.  The push service
   is the only entity that needs to be able to correlate subscriptions
   with a registration.

   Note:  This need not be perfect as long as the resulting anonymity
      set (see [RFC6973], Section 6.1.1) is sufficiently large.  A
      subscription URI necessarily identifies a push service or a single
      server instance.  It is also possible that traffic analysis could
      be used to correlate subscriptions.

   A user agent MUST be able to create new registrations and
   subscriptions with new identifiers at any time.

8.3.  Authorization

   This protocol does not define how a push service establishes whether
   a user agent is permitted to create a registration or subscription,
   or whether push messages can be delivered to the user agent.  A push
   service MAY choose to authorize request based on any HTTP-compatible
   authorization method available, of which there are numerous options.
   The authorization process and any associated credentials are expected
   to be configured in the user agent along with the URI for the "push
   service".

   Authorization for sending push messages is managed using capability
   URLs (see [CAP-URI]).  A capability URL grants access to a resource
   based solely on knowledge of the URL.  Capability URLs are used for
   their "easy onward sharing" and "easy client API" properties.  These
   make it possible to avoid relying on relationships between push
   services and application servers, with the protocols necessary to
   build and support those relationships.

   A subscription URI therefore acts as a bearer token: knowledge of the
   URI implies authorization to send push messages.  Subscription URIs
   MUST be extremely difficult to guess.  Encoding a large amount of
   random entropy (at least 120 bits) in the path component ensures that
   it is difficult to successfully guess a valid subscription URI.

8.4.  Denial of Service Considerations

   Discarding unwanted messages at the user agent based on message
   authentication doesn't protect against a denial of service attack on
   the user agent.  Even a relatively small volume of push messages can



Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   cause battery-powered devices to exhaust power reserves.  Limiting
   the number of entities with access to push channels limits the number
   of entities that can generate value push requests of the push server.

   An application can limit where push messages can originate by
   limiting the distribution of subscription URIs to authorized
   entities.  Ensuring that subscription URIs are hard to guess ensures
   that only applications servers that have been given a subscription
   URI can use it.

   A malicious application with a valid subscription use the greater
   resources of a push service to mount a denial of service attack on a
   user agent.  Push service SHOULD limit the rate at which push
   messages are sent to individual user agents.  A push service or user
   agent MAY terminate subscriptions (Section 7.3) that receives too
   many push messages.

   End-to-end confidentiality mechanisms, such as those in [API],
   prevent an entity with a registration URI from learning the contents
   of push messages.  In both cases, push messages that are not
   successfully authenticated will not be delivered by the API, but this
   can present a denial of service risk.

   Conversely, a push service is also able to deny service to user
   agents.  Intentional failure to deliver messages is difficult to
   distinguish from faults, which might occur due to transient network
   errors, interruptions in user agent availability, or genuine service
   outages.

8.5.  Logging Risks

   Server request logs can reveal registration and subscription URIs.
   Acquiring a registration URI permits the creation of new
   subscriptions, as well as potentially enabling the receipt of
   messages.  Acquiring a subscription URI permits the sending of push
   messages.  Logging could also reveal relationships between different
   subscription URIs for the same registration, or between different
   registrations for the same user agent.

   Limitations on log retention and strong access control mechanisms can
   ensure that URIs are not learned by unauthorized entities.

9.  IANA Considerations

   This document registers three URNs for use in identifying link
   relation types.  These are added to a new "Web Push Identifiers"
   registry according to the procedures in Section 4 of [RFC3553]; the




Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   corresponding "push" sub-namespace is entered in the "IETF URN Sub-
   namespace for Registered Protocol Parameter Identifiers" registry.

   The "Web Push Identifiers" registry operates under the IETF Review
   policy [RFC5226].

   Registry name:  Web Push Identifiers

   URN Prefix:  urn:ietf:params:push

   Specification:  (this document)

   Respository:  [Editor/IANA note: please include a link to the final
      registry location.]

   Index value:  Values in this registry are URNs or URN prefixes that
      start with the prefix "urn:ietf:params:push".  Each is registered
      independently.

   New registrations in the "Web Push Identifiers" are encouraged to
   include the following information:

   URN:  A complete URN or URN prefix.

   Description:  A summary description.

   Specification:  A reference to a specification describing the
      semantics of the URN or URN prefix.

   Contact:  Email for the person or group making the registration.

   Index value:  As described in [RFC3553], URN prefixes that are
      registered include a description of how the URN is constructed.
      This is not applicable for specific URNs.

   Three values are entered as the initial content of the "Web Push
   Identifiers" registry.

   URN:  urn:ietf:params:push

   Description:  This link relation type is used to identify a web push
      subscription.

   Specification:  (this document)

   Contact:  Martin Thomson (martin.thomson@gmail) or the Web Push WG
      (webpush@ietf.org)




Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   URN:  urn:ietf:params:push:reg

   Description:  This link relation type is used to identify a web push
      registration.

   Specification:  (this document)

   Contact:  Martin Thomson (martin.thomson@gmail) or the Web Push WG
      (webpush@ietf.org)

   URN:  urn:ietf:params:push:sub

   Description:  This link relation type is used to identify a resource
      that can be used to create new web push subscriptions.

   Specification:  (this document)

   Contact:  Martin Thomson (martin.thomson@gmail) or the Web Push WG
      (webpush@ietf.org)

10.  Acknowledgements

   Significant technical input to this document has been provided by
   Costin Manolache, Robert Sparks, Mark Nottingham, Matthew Kaufman and
   many others.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [CAP-URI]  Tennison, J., "Good Practices for Capability URLs", FPWD
              capability-urls, February 2014,
              <http://www.w3.org/TR/capability-urls/>.

   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-alt-svc]
              Nottingham, M., McManus, P., and J. Reschke, "HTTP
              Alternative Services", draft-ietf-httpbis-alt-svc-06 (work
              in progress), February 2015.

   [I-D.ietf-httpbis-http2]
              Belshe, M., Peon, R., and M. Thomson, "Hypertext Transfer
              Protocol version 2", draft-ietf-httpbis-http2-17 (work in
              progress), February 2015.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2818]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.



Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   [RFC3553]  Mealling, M., Masinter, L., Hardie, T., and G. Klyne, "An
              IETF URN Sub-namespace for Registered Protocol
              Parameters", BCP 73, RFC 3553, June 2003.

   [RFC5226]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 5226,
              May 2008.

   [RFC5988]  Nottingham, M., "Web Linking", RFC 5988, October 2010.

   [RFC7230]  Fielding, R. and J. Reschke, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol
              (HTTP/1.1): Message Syntax and Routing", RFC 7230, June
              2014.

   [RFC7231]  Fielding, R. and J. Reschke, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol
              (HTTP/1.1): Semantics and Content", RFC 7231, June 2014.

   [RFC7232]  Fielding, R. and J. Reschke, "Hypertext Transfer Protocol
              (HTTP/1.1): Conditional Requests", RFC 7232, June 2014.

   [RFC7234]  Fielding, R., Nottingham, M., and J. Reschke, "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol (HTTP/1.1): Caching", RFC 7234, June
              2014.

   [RFC7240]  Snell, J., "Prefer Header for HTTP", RFC 7240, June 2014.

11.2.  Informative References

   [API]      Sullivan, B., Fullea, E., and M. van Ouwerkerk, "Web Push
              API", ED push-api, February 2015, <https://w3c.github.io/
              push-api/>.

   [RFC6973]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973, July
              2013.

   [TS.3GPP.23.040]
              3GPP, "Technical realization of the Short Message Service
              (SMS)", 3GPP TS 23.040 12.2.0, October 2014.

Author's Address









Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft                HTTP Web Push                   March 2015


   Martin Thomson
   Mozilla
   331 E Evelyn Street
   Mountain View, CA  94041
   US

   Email: martin.thomson@gmail.com












































Thomson                Expires September 27, 2015              [Page 18]
